Title: Opinion: Game nearly over
Date: 2016-03-13 09:00
status: draft
---- todo title, metadata, sidebar, image ---



So here’s the news: Microsoft is forcing
game developers and game developing companies through the hoop of their
app store, [encroaching on their revenue and
putting itself in the way of dealing directly with the
customers](http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/04/microsoft-monopolise-pc-games-development-epic-games-gears-of-war).   Why am I
not in the least bit surprised?


This happens when you put all your eggs into one basket, a basket held
by a hulking, monopolistic company. When Thomas Edison became too greedy
with his patented cinematography technology, the people who wanted to
make films made the perilous crossing of the American continent to
escape his shakedowns. But where do game developers go from here? There
is no landmass, or ocean for that matter, that Microsoft and their
platform do not reach. They can threaten to gate you out of their
platform on a global scale, which is exactly what they are doing with
Epic. And as Windows is the only game in town, the digital entertainment
industry is mightily and royally screwed.

Hands up those of you who didn’t see that coming.

Here’s a thought: If the industry had diversified the platforms they
targeted earlier on, say in the mid-2000s, when Linux was starting to
come into its own, maybe this situation could’ve been avoided. Yes,
marketshare, library support, drivers, hardware support, and so one,
were not ideal on Linux back in the day. But we have seen how things can
be turned around, right? We have an example in living memory of how, how
by unilaterally nurturing a rich ecosystem of apps, you can get users to
adopt a new platform. And with a healthy amount of users, developing for
the new guys, even developing drivers, suddenly becomes a sound business
strategy for third parties. Yes, it is circular reasoning: more apps
attract more users and more users attract more apps (which attract more
users), but that is how Android became top dog in the mobile app arena.

If just a handful of PC game companies had stopped for a second and
analysed where their market was going back then, they would have still
been in time to jump start a viable gaming platform using Linux.

It’s a bit late now, though. In fact,
probably way too late. As we have seen, efforts like those of Valve
porting Steam to Linux have clearly not been successful. Two years down
the line and this month’s survey reveals
that [the percentage of Steam users on Linux
is noew below 1%](http://store.steampowered.com/hwsurvey). Although
these figures do not take into account users of SteamOS itself or,
indeed, users who are forced to dual-boot to play their favourite games,
they would make any company executive balk at the idea of porting their
games to Linux.

Notwithstanding, my gut feeling is that only by cutting Microsoft out
completely, by boycotting their platforms, and then migrating games to
another, friendlier and more open platform (hint, hint) would developers
be able to reverse Microsoft’s stranglehold on the PC gaming industry.

However, I am not delusional and I realise
that it is unlikely that any company is going to take such an enormous
risk at this stage of play. It would give too much of an advantage to
competitors who *are* willing to
jump through Microsoft’s hoops. As for the gamers: they don’t care, at
least they don’t care enough. The whole gaming industry, users included,
have slithered down the conformity slope way too far to turn back it
would seem.

So they had it coming. All those game companies which never freed a line
of code in their lives and hang on to decade-old titles just to try and
squeeze a few more bucks out of the users with pointless, crappy
anniversary editions? All those developers that ignored Linux and its
users? They built this market and the market is as they are: lazy,
greedy, pitiless and cut-throat.

In other gaming
news, [MAME, the emulation engine that
allows you to play classical arcade and console videogames, is now open
source](http://mamedev.org/?p=422). Now
distributed under mostly GPL licenses, Linux distributions will be able
to start packaging all its bits and pieces for their users right
away.

And that’s how it should be done.


